This document describes why to use Godot + Bevy stack first place.
## Reasoning

One of the main advantages of Godot is customizability. Many tools are missing at this point, but it is like a blank sheet allowing you to establish your own flows around it.

It's lightweight, provides you scene architecture, decent rendering capabilities, and multiplatform builds which allow to target wider audiences. 

However, it lacks in more advanced areas, one of which is gameplay programming. GDScript is still very basic and misses many common language features (static typing is meh, no safe option typing, no fully-typed first-class functions, no interfaces, inheritance plague same as in Unity or UE). More to it, it doesn't provide you with specific way of organizing and scaling your core game logic. Scene organization mixes two concerns - how things relate and how they look. In many ways, it just repeats what UE and Unity already do, just making it less opinionated and building on open source premise.

Bevy in this stack aims to close those gaps - it allows doing very advanced gameplay programming in scalable way. It's performant, organized, uses much more mature language yet is not opinionated about how **your** game will work. It has no editor, built-in multiplayer, and it's cross-platform support is not as seamless as in Godot.

By cross-breeding them we allow a system that will allow visual and intuitive workflow while utilizing advantages of Bevy and Rust programming language.
## Implementation overview

Godot allows using any other languages for scripting via GDExtension. It's allows connection dynamic libraries (.dll) to your project that interact with Godot through API protocol allows most of the features available via GDScript.

Community built Rust bridge that allows to script for Godot using Rust. This repo adds thin Bevy bridge on top of Rust bridge, providing additional wrappers for seamless Bevy integration into Godot. 

### Roles & boundary

General picture is similar to classical full stack.

Godot plays two roles:
- runtime front-end - receives the most recent data from backend, presents to player and gathers input which it sends to backend
- visual editor - allows artists, game designers and other to do their job without going into code

Rust represents backend, being high-performance game core doing simulation of game world.

Those areas are very distinct, both in terms of workflow and their runtime goals, and classical game engines don't do great job separating them. This stack aims to solve it.

**Godot (view layer)**  

It's responsibilities are:
- during development:
	- visual level design
	- control mapping
	- packaging for console and browser
- in runtime:
	- bootstrapping Bevy **simulation**
	- representing simulated Bevy state on Godot side, including:
		- rendering in-game objects
		- playing visual, audio effects
		- UI rendering and level
	- gathering input and sending it to Bevy
	- (potentially) multiplayer networking

Owns the scene tree, cameras, animation, particles, shaders, audio, UI. It **never mutates** simulation state directly, but can share events which Bevy will process; also it reacts to signals and reads getters exposed by Bevy . Godot’s scene tree is **not thread-safe**, so all node manipulation happens on the **main thread** (use `call_deferred` / signals).
   
**Bevy (simulation layer)**  

It's responsibilities are:
- full game simulation
	- physics
	- game world rules
	- decision-making AIs
	- reacting to player commands triggered via controls
- talking with Godot
	- exposing Nodes to listen for state changes
	- exposing Nodes to notify allow external simulation interactions (mainly player controls)

It owns ECS state, gameplay rules, physics, AI, pathfinding, etc. It exposes **signals and getters** for Godot Nodes to read; it ingests **events** from Godot. We use Bevy’s **change detection** and **signals** to push only real changes.

### Bevy → Godot 

We’ll generate **Component-specific _Exporter Nodes_** (via Rust macros) that Godot attaches under a known parent (e.g., `BevyAppSingleton`) on demand. They expose:

- **Signals**: fired on changes (e.g., `health_changed(entity_id, new, old)`), so Godot updates only when it must. Signals implement the Observer pattern natively in Godot.
	- `component_created(entity_id, component_state)`
	- `component_changed(entity_id, component_state)`
	- `component_removed(entity_id)`
- **Getters**: read-only queries for current `component_state` (used sparingly; signals should stay primary way to track state).

Components are created with macro, which generates:
- Bevy component
- Godot ViewNode with signals
- Component State struct which is Godot-side representation for data contained in component

#### How changes are detected and pushed


