
By Data Transfer we mean - how data is transferred from Bevy to Godot and back.

We consider Bevy source of truth as it simulates core game logic. Because of that, transitioning data from Bevy for presentation is called Export, and injecting events into Bevy is called Import.

## Requirements

The main idea of export and import pipelines - they should not interfere with main game logic. In practice this means that we have bunch of requirements.

Global:
- you extend main simulation without touching data transfer code 
- data transfer code is located separately from main simulation
- data transfer can depend on simulation components
- simulation must have no dependencies on data transfer code

Export:
- export happens before every render, outside Bevy `.update()` 
- all export systems are read only and can be executed directly on Bevy world synchronously 

Import:
- import only injects events and messages, reactions to them are part of main Bevy simulation
- import is accumulated and injected just before Bevy `.update()`

All systems mentioned below are to be run on `world` instance directly, outside `.update()`.

## Observations

1. Bevy-Godot bridge as a whole is a way to implement presentation layer for Bevy outside it. Bevy project remains complete game if extracted, but Godot part does not. The only place where Bevy depends on Godot is bootstrapping the game and update cycle.
2. Performant data transfer and debug tools are 90% of what bridge needs to provide, everything else is either game-specific or QoL
3. Whenever entity is exported, it will likely need to be imported as well, due to level design reasons - Castles, Barracks, default units as example. When entity is imported it not always needs to be exported - Obstacle entities as example.
4. There are two reasons for import - injecting entities and player actions. Entity import can be abstracted to an action, it is the same thing with a different trigger.
5. Data export and import have the same structure, inversed. There is single entity collecting data for sharing (passively or actively), conversion between Bevy data domain and Godot, then single entity on the other side that dispatches data.
6. The only case where bidirectional communication is needed is actions with response. In all other cases we send data and forget.
7. When importing entities, the best way to represent them is to import them as a whole. Composition should happen Bevy-side, while in Godot you have fixed archetypes.
8. In Export, DTO bundle is never used in Bevy gameplay code, so it can be generated by macro. In Import, Intention represents DTO bundle and shouldn't be accessed by system. Message however, represents Bevy-bundle representation and each DTO should be represented by appropriate Bevy-side data structure

## DTOs

Both Export and Import use Data Transfer Objects heavily.

This is due to Rust and Bevy thread-safe nature. Anything that is contained inside Bevy simulation has to be safely shareable between multiple threads. Godot Rust entities (`Gd<>`) can't give that guarantee because it's not known what uses them in Godot and at which point they might change.

Because of that, on Godot/Rust boundary we need to convert data between Rust-only objects that can be injected into ECS and Godot objects.

Most of the data transferred doesn't change structure, so there is usually Message / Event / Component / Resource that is that reflects it. We create Godot `RefCounted` DTO struct for data transfer to use under the hood automatically.

Advantages DTOs provide are:
- thread-safety out of the box
- allow conversion between Rust and Godot-types (Enums are common example)
- 3rd party library components / resources still can be shared with Godot via implementing DTO for them (Bevy Transforms, Rapier3d Colliders and so on)
- allow extending simulation independently since presentation depends on DTOs and simulation parts are abstracted
- if there are breaking changes when refactoring simulation - they will be caught on DTO level and highlighted

The biggest drawback - extra memory allocations and mutations can drag performance down. Export and import can become bottleneck and require careful optimization to not cripple Bevy performance benefits. Godot uses Rust memory directly without copying on boundary, so general performance should be on par with conventional Godot at least.

## Export

To expose data to Godot, we provide set of macros that generate entity-specific or component-specific export tools which need to can be wired on Bevy and Godot sides in simple way. 

Godot doesn't have generics and to ensure safe and comfortable usage each generated entity has similar implementation, but static typing specific for given entity/component, with no type relation. Entities of the same kind are identifiable by name, not by their common superclass.

Here are all entities involved in export:
- ComponentDTO - RefCounted, contains data of specific Bevy component to be transferred to Godot.
- WraperDTO - RefCounted, represents entity and contains multiple component DTOs as fields to be transferred to Godot. Fields can be required or optional.
- ExporterSystem - Bevy system, queries all data required to build specific DTO for transfer and triggers
- ExporterNode - Node, Bevy triggers `created`,  `updated`, `removed` signals to notify about changes in specific Bevy components or entities, with DTOs as arguments

### How to export an entity

1. Make sure `DtoFrom<>` is implemented for all components to be exported
2. Make sure entity has associated Tag component, it's required to identify entities which are exported
3. Use `export_bundle!` macro to generate whole export pipeline for an entity
4. On Bevy side: 
	1. Register `${EntityName}ExportPlugin`, otherwise change detection will not kick-in and no data will be sent to Godot
5. On Godot side:
	1. Attach `${EntityName}EntityExporter` to `BevyApp` in Godot
	2. Create scene where root node implements `${EntityName}Entity`.
	3. Attach `${EntityName}EntitySpawnHandler` to `BevyApp` in Godot and overwrite `scene` field to point to created scene

For all Godot classes you can look at API docs in editor to see available methods.

## Import


### Importing actions

Importing action simply means there is an import queue which injects Intentions into Bevy as gameplay message. Then, there is single Bevy gameplay system which handles the message. 

If response is needed, there should be output message with output queue. 

For response reasons, gameplay code should avoid working with message queues directly, and instead SystemParam should be implemented that will query message queues and allow responding to them via defined API. API should enforce response if possible.
### Importing entities

Importing entities should happen similar way as importing actions. There is funnel for import queue where entities automatically register themselves when added to the level. Entities should be imported via single node that accepts parameters for all entity creation. The payload should contain all information needed to initialize entity components. 

#### Bevy side

Gameplay code defines Message which accepts bunch of components in our case. Then, system is implemented to accept those messages, meaning that any gameplay system also gets capability to generate such message to spawn entity.

If we look at different actions, the difference is only that for the payload - it might be spell cast params, set of components to create entity, or let's say details for Resource initialization.
#### Godot side

After the message is introduced, we basically expose this capability to Godot-side so you can also trigger action from there. The core thing we do is queue with message injection, everything else is Godot-side helpers.

To allow reusing logic, for example collecting information from collider nodes to create collider in Bevy, entity node exposes arguments that point at specific configuration node - Gatherer. Then, Gatherer node is created and assigned for each field, and will construct DTO of appropriate type when level starts. Gatherers we generate are basically helpers to fill in all DTO details, but theoretically could be all manual. 

